README.md, before:

# Stdio

Stream standard I/O from system processes.

Reliably reap, restrict and isolate system tasks:
[Stdio](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/) is a control plane for processes.

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S0[supervise]
    B([beam]) -->|user| S1[supervise]
    S0 --> |user|I0[[init]]
    S0 --> |user|I1[[init]]
    subgraph namespace0
    I0 --> C0[[echo 'Hello']]
    end
    subgraph namespace1
    I1 --> C1[[echo 'System working?']]
    end
    S1 --> C2[[echo 'Seems to be.']]
```

## Installation

`Stdio` is an Elixir library. The package can be installed by adding
`stdio` to your list of dependencies in `mix.exs`:

```elixir
def deps do
  [
    {:stdio, "~> 0.1.0"}
  ]
end
```

## Usage

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("echo test") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "test\n", exit_status: 0]
```

Commands use `/bin/sh -c`:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("pstree $$") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "sh---pstree\n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S --> I[[sh]]
    I --> C[[pstree]]
```

### Pipes

Streams can be piped into processes:

```elixir
iex> ["let", "it", "crash"] |> Stdio.pipe!("tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "LETITCRASH", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|"[let, it, crash]"|S[supervise]
    S --> I[[sh]]
    I --> |"[let, it, crash]"|C[["tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'"]]
    C --> O(["LETITCRASH"])
```

### Argument List

Commands can executed without an intermediary shell process by using
an argv. Since `$PATH` is not consulted, the path to the executable
is required:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!(["/bin/echo", "test"]) |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "test\n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S --> C[[/bin/echo test]]
```

### Background Processes

Background and daemonized processes are reaped when the foreground
process exits:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("sleep 131 & sleep 111 & echo $$") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "25723\n", exit_status: 0]
iex> Stdio.Procfs.children(25723)
[]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S -.-x I[[/bin/sh]]
    I -.-x C0[[sleep 131]]
    I -.-x C1[[sleep 111]]
    S --> C0
    S --> C1
```

### Setuid Binaries

Setuid processes are disabled by default to prevent unkillable processes.

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8") |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: ssend socket: Operation not permitted\n", exit_status: 71]
```

The process can escalate privileges by using the `setuid` option:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Process, setuid: true) |> Enum.to_list()
[
  stdout: "PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8): 56 data bytes\n64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=0 ttl=116 time=1.726 ms\n",
  stdout: "\n--- 8.8.8.8 ping statistics ---\n1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received, 0.0% packet loss\nround-trip min/avg/max/stddev = 1.726/1.726/1.726/0.000 ms\n",
  exit_status: 0
]
```

### Privileges

> #### Warning
> Some behaviours may require running system processes as the root user.
> 
> For setup, see
> [Stdio.setuid/0](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/Stdio.html#setuid/0).

### Process Isolation

Behaviours can implement process restrictions or process isolation. For
example, by default the `Stdio.Rootless` behaviour does not have network
access:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ip -br addr show", Stdio.Rootless) |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "lo               DOWN           \n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|user| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[init]]
    subgraph "user/network namespace"
    I --> C[[ip -br addr show]]
    end
```

### Linux Container

The `Stdio.Container` behaviour also disables network access:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Container, setuid: true) |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: connect: Network is unreachable\n", exit_status: 2]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "network namespace"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

If `setuid` is allowed and the `host` network is shared, `ping` works
as expected:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Container, setuid: true, net: :host) |> Enum.to_list()
[
  stdout: "PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) 56(84) bytes of data.\n64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=1 ttl=115 time=32.4 ms\n\n--- 8.8.8.8 ping statistics ---\n1 packets transmitted, 1 received, 0% packet loss, time 0ms\nrtt min/avg/max/mdev = 32.390/32.390/32.390/0.000 ms\n",
  exit_status: 0
]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "namespace (net shared with parent)"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

### FreeBSD Jails

FreeBSD Jails work in a similar way. An argv is used because the process
is `chroot(2)`'ed in `/rescue`, a directory containing statically linked
binaries. By default `setuid` and `net` are disabled:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!(["./ping", "-c", "1", "8.8.8.8"], Stdio.Jail, path: "/rescue") |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: ssend socket: Protocol not supported\n", exit_status: 71]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "jail"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

## Documentation

Documentation is available on [hexdocs](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/).

Commit message:

0.1.0
* jail: network: use local IPv4/6 addreses with host option

* add type specs and docs

* StdioOpTest: fork a supervisor per test instead of for all tests

  When fork()'ing from an existing supervisor in a tight loop,
  `:prx.fork(supervisor)` sporadically returns a PID which crashes with
  {:exit, :noproc} when a call is made into the process.

TODO:

* cgroup behaviour: cgroup/cgroup2 via port and possibly File module

* network behaviour: veth, userspace via SOCKS5/proxy protocol

* mount: overlayfs, set options such as tmpfs sizes

README.md, after:

# Stdio

Stream standard I/O from system processes.

Reliably reap, restrict and isolate system tasks:
[Stdio](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/) is a control plane for processes.

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S0[supervise]
    B([beam]) -->|user| S1[supervise]
    S0 --> |user|I0[[init]]
    S0 --> |user|I1[[init]]
    subgraph namespace0
    I0 --> C0[[echo 'Hello']]
    end
    subgraph namespace1
    I1 --> C1[[echo 'System working?']]
    end
    S1 --> C2[[echo 'Seems to be.']]
```

## Installation

`Stdio` is an Elixir library. The package can be installed by adding
`stdio` to your list of dependencies in `mix.exs`:

```elixir
def deps do
  [
    {:stdio, "~> 0.1.0"}
  ]
end
```

## Usage

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("echo test") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "test\n", exit_status: 0]
```

Commands use `/bin/sh -c`:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("pstree $$") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "sh---pstree\n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S --> I[[sh]]
    I --> C[[pstree]]
```

### Pipes

Streams can be piped into processes:

```elixir
iex> ["let", "it", "crash"] |> Stdio.pipe!("tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "LETITCRASH", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|"[let, it, crash]"|S[supervise]
    S --> I[[sh]]
    I --> |"[let, it, crash]"|C[["tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'"]]
    C --> O(["LETITCRASH"])
```

### Argument List

Commands can executed without an intermediary shell process by using
an argv. Since `$PATH` is not consulted, the path to the executable
is required:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!(["/bin/echo", "test"]) |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "test\n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S --> C[[/bin/echo test]]
```

### Background Processes

Background and daemonized processes are reaped when the foreground
process exits:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("sleep 131 & sleep 111 & echo $$") |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "25723\n", exit_status: 0]
iex> Stdio.Procfs.children(25723)
[]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->S[supervise]
    S -.-x I[[/bin/sh]]
    I -.-x C0[[sleep 131]]
    I -.-x C1[[sleep 111]]
    S --> C0
    S --> C1
```

### Setuid Binaries

Setuid processes are disabled by default to prevent unkillable processes.

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8") |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: ssend socket: Operation not permitted\n", exit_status: 71]
```

The process can escalate privileges by using the `setuid` option:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Process, setuid: true) |> Enum.to_list()
[
  stdout: "PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8): 56 data bytes\n64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=0 ttl=116 time=1.726 ms\n",
  stdout: "\n--- 8.8.8.8 ping statistics ---\n1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received, 0.0% packet loss\nround-trip min/avg/max/stddev = 1.726/1.726/1.726/0.000 ms\n",
  exit_status: 0
]
```

### Privileges

> #### Warning
> Some behaviours may require running system processes as the root user.
> 
> For setup, see
> [Stdio.setuid/0](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/Stdio.html#setuid/0).

Behaviours may change the root filesystem for the process. The default
`chroot(2)` directory hierarchy can be created by running:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.Container.make_chroot_tree!()
```

### Process Isolation

Behaviours can implement process restrictions or process isolation. For
example, by default the `Stdio.Rootless` behaviour does not have network
access:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ip -br addr show", Stdio.Rootless) |> Enum.to_list()
[stdout: "lo               DOWN           \n", exit_status: 0]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|user| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[init]]
    subgraph "user/network namespace"
    I --> C[[ip -br addr show]]
    end
```

### Linux Container

The `Stdio.Container` behaviour also disables network access:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Container, setuid: true) |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: connect: Network is unreachable\n", exit_status: 2]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "network namespace"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

If `setuid` is allowed and the `host` network is shared, `ping` works
as expected:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!("ping -c 1 8.8.8.8", Stdio.Container, setuid: true, net: :host) |> Enum.to_list()
[
  stdout: "PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) 56(84) bytes of data.\n64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=1 ttl=115 time=32.4 ms\n\n--- 8.8.8.8 ping statistics ---\n1 packets transmitted, 1 received, 0% packet loss, time 0ms\nrtt min/avg/max/mdev = 32.390/32.390/32.390/0.000 ms\n",
  exit_status: 0
]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "namespace (net shared with parent)"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

### FreeBSD Jails

FreeBSD Jails work in a similar way. An argv is used because the process
is `chroot(2)`'ed in `/rescue`, a directory containing statically linked
binaries. By default `setuid` and `net` are disabled:

```elixir
iex> Stdio.stream!(["./ping", "-c", "1", "8.8.8.8"], Stdio.Jail, path: "/rescue") |> Enum.to_list()
[stderr: "ping: ssend socket: Protocol not supported\n", exit_status: 71]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    B([beam]) -->|root| S[supervise]
    S --> |user|I[[sh]]
    subgraph "jail"
    I --> C[[ping -c 1 8.8.8.8]]
    end
```

## Documentation

Documentation is available on [hexdocs](https://hexdocs.pm/stdio/).
